# Introduction

Reinforced concrete is, along with steel, a widely used structural material in the construction of buildings, bridges and other such infrastructure. The primary tasks for a structural engineer working with reinforced concrete are design and analysis.

Design aims to proportion the section size and determine the reinforcement required to resist a given set of design forces. For a beam section, design foces constitute bending moment, shear force and torsional moment. For a column section, design forces constitute axial compression and bending moment about one or both major axes.

Analysis involves determining the capacity of a given section with known reinforcement details. For a beam section, capacity in bending and shear are computed. For a column section, the pair of axial compression and bending moment about one axis are computed.

Be it design or analysis, it is first necessary to work at the section level and subsequntly carry out design or analysis of the entire structural element, such as a beam or a column. The design of a beam or a column can be treated as the design of a series of sections at critical locations. Similarly, analysis of a structural element, such as a beam or a column, requires the calculation of the capacity of sections at critical locations and comparing it with the design force at that section.

The tasks of design and analysis are complements of each other. When we design, the intention is that the designed section must have a capacity equal to or greater than the imposed design forces. However, the actual capacity of the section after design is rarely computed and the over-strength of the designed section is usually not known. The analysis of a section results in the calculation of the capacity of the section and comparing the capacity with the forces that are known to act at the section help us in deciding whether the section is safe or unsafe as well as determine the strength ratio - the ratio of the capacity of the section to the design force imposed on the section.

In this work, the task of analysis of a section is taken up first even though the more common task is that of design. That is because, analysis is more precise compared to design which requires adjusting quantities upwards, such as the number of reinforcement bars to be provided, because it is not possible to provide fraction of a bar. Moreover, analysis does not involve the task of detailing, such as ensuring the horizontal distance between bars is greater than the prescribed minimum, checking if the required number of reinforcement bars will fit within the breadth of the beam and adjusting them in multiple layers if they do not all fit in a single layer etc. This makes analysis simpler than design.

The task of design can be broken down into determining the required section dimensions, reinforcement bars, satisfying detailing requirements and finally calculating the capacity of the section and computing the strength ratio. Thus, completing the task of analysis first aids the task of design.

## Software Architecture
This project will adopt the Object Oriented Programming&nbsp;(OOP) approach to design and implement a set of classes and class hierarchies to represent the important components of reinforced concrete sections and structural elements. This approach is well suited to the problem at hand for several reasons:

1. The concepts of data encapsulation is very helpful since each entity has several attributes and passing an object of a specific class will automatically carry its state in a single object. This will greatly reduce the number of arguments that must be passed to functions if it were to be implemented using the procedural programming approach.
2. The concept of abstract classes and inheritance can repesent the relation between such entities as a rectangular beam section and a flanged beam section are concrete types of the abstract class such as a section. Similar relation exists between mild steel reinforcement bar and HYSD bar which are concrete classes of the abstract class such as reinforcement bar. Similarly, vertical stirrups, inclined stirrups and bent-up bars are concrete classes of the abstract class shear reinforcement.
3. The concept of composition where a class is a synthesis of several components directly represents the construction of a class such as a section that consists of concrete, main reinforcement bars and shear reinforcement bars in addition to the attributes of a section such as its dimensions.